---
extensions:
  pygments: true
  toc: true
---

# A Tale of Two RFCs

A few minutes ago, my third RFC,
[adding support for promoted final properties][final-promotion], was implemented
after being approved unanimously. This comes after my second RFC,
[adding support for `never` parameters][never-params-rfc], was rejected by the
community.

I wrote both of these RFCs because I thought that the feature might be useful
for others in the broader PHP developer community. In neither case was the
feature something I personally was likely to use. While the decisive 3-23
defeat of the `never` parameters RFC was annoying, I'm not too beaten up about
the result - `never` parameters isn't something that I desperately wanted the
language to include. Likewise, while I am glad that final property promotion was
approved, if it had been rejected I probably wouldn't have dwelled on it too
much.

Since `never`-typed parameters were rejected, I'm not going to discuss them
further; if you are interested, the [discussion thread][never-params-discussion]
and [vote thread][never-params-vote] on the
[PHP internals mailing list][internals] covers some of the reasons why the
feature was not accepted. Instead, I'll focus on the RFC that was accepted and
just got implemented - supporting `final` on promoted properties.

## Background - CPP

Constructor property promotion (CPP) is a feature that was
[added in PHP 8.0][rfc-cpp] to reduce boilerplace in the common case of class
properties being initialized in the constructor. For example:

```php
<?php
class User {
	private int $id;
	private string $name;

	public function __construct( int $id, string $name ) {
		$this->id = $id;
		$this->name = $name;
	}
}
```

The pattern of declaring a class property and initializing it in the constructor
is so common that a shortcut, constructor property promotion, was added:

```php
<?php
class User {
	public function __construct(
		private int $id,
		private string $name
	) {}
}
```

This second code example has the exact same behavior as the first one; by
virtual of the `private` keywords in the parameter declarations, in addition to
declaring parameters for the constructor, the `$id` and `$name` are "promoted"
to class properties, and the properties are initialized with the values given in
the constructor.

## Hooks and final properties

I discovered the lack of support for `final` on promoted properties while
working on [adding support for final properties][phpcs-final-props] in the
[PHP CodeSniffer library][phpcs-lib]. As part of the
[addition of property hooks][rfc-prop-hooks], PHP 8.4 added support
[for properties to be declared `final`][rfc-prop-hooks--final]:

```php
<?php
class ParentClass {
	public final string $myProp;
}
class ChildClass extends ParentClass {
	public string $myProp;
}
```

results in

> Fatal error: Cannot override final property ParentClass::$myProp in {file}
> on line {line}

while in previous versions of PHP there would have been an error about not
being allowed to use `final` for properties.

At the same time, hooked properties could also
[be used with constructor property promotion][rfc-prop-hooks--cpp]:

```php
<?php
class AlwaysCapitalized {
	public function __construct(
		public string $inner { set => strtoupper( $value ); }
	) {}
}

$str = new AlwaysCapitalized( "lowercase" );
echo $str->inner . "\n"; // LOWERCASE

$str->inner = "again lowercase";
echo $str->inner . "\n"; // AGAIN LOWERCASE
```

Since constructor property promotion worked with hooked properties, I expected
that it would also work for final properties, for the same reason - reducing
boilerplate.

## Discovery

However, PHP 8.4 did not support final promoted properties, with or without
hooks; the code

```php
<?php
class Demo {
	public function __construct(
		public final $prop
	) {}
}
```

would trigger an error

> Fatal error: Cannot use the final modifier on a parameter in {file} on line
> {line}

I thought that the missing support for using `final` with promoted properties
was a bug - without that support, a developer would need to write out
boilerplate when using final properties, exactly what constructor property
promotion was meant to reduce!

```php
<?php
class User {
	private final int $id;
	private final string $name;

	public function __construct( int $id, string $name ) {
		$this->id = $id;
		$this->name = $name;
	}
}
```

## From bug fix to RFC

When I discovered that `final` could not be used on promoted properties, I filed
[a bug report][bug-report] explaining the error. However, it turned out that
"fixing" the "bug" was not as complicated as I expected it would be, and I was
able to send [a patch][patch] later the same day to implement the missing
functionality.

I was then told that the "bug" was not a bug at all, but rather had been a
deliberate omission from the property hooks RFC. The "bug" report and associated
pull request were both closed.

But, just because it was omitted earlier didn't mean that the community didn't
want the feature - it wasn't voted on and explicitly rejected, it was just
left out of the enormous property hooks RFC. Accordingly, I converted the bug
report to a feature request, and [emailed the PHP internals mailing][init-email]
to see if there were any objections, or if the feature was small enough that it
would be accepted without needing an RFC.

As it turns out, one developer (who noted that they did *not* oppose the
feature, and eventually voted in favor of the RFC) insisted that, though small,
the feature should indeed go through the RFC process. And so it did, being
accepted with a vote of 25-0.

As for what comes next, I've already started discussion on [an RFC][dtv-attrib]
to add a new `#[\DelayedTargetValidation]` attribute. Hopefully that will also
be accepted for PHP 8.5.

[final-promotion]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/final_promotion
[never-params-rfc]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/never-parameters-v2
[never-params-discussion]: https://externals.io/message/126698
[never-params-vote]: https://externals.io/message/127159
[internals]: https://externals.io/
[phpcs-final-props]: https://github.com/PHPCSStandards/PHP_CodeSniffer/pull/834
[phpcs-lib]: https://github.com/PHPCSStandards/PHP_CodeSniffer
[rfc-prop-hooks]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/property-hooks#final_hooks
[rfc-prop-hooks--cpp]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/property-hooks#interaction_with_constructor_property_promotion
[rfc-prop-hooks--final]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/property-hooks#final_hooks
[rfc-cpp]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/constructor_promotion
[bug-report]: https://github.com/php/php-src/issues/17860
[patch]: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/17861
[init-email]: https://externals.io/message/126475
[dtv-attrib]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/delayedtargetvalidation_attribute
