# Attributes on constants

XXX, the [attributes-on-constants][rfc] RFC implementation was finally merged.
This is something I was working on for months, and a big reason I became so
active as a developer of the PHP source. The initial motivation was to add a way
for constants to be marked as deprecated, so that MediaWiki could use that
feature to signal deprecated constants instead of relying solely on
documentation.

The feature presented in the RFC is to allow using PHP 8
[attributes][php-attribs] on compile-time non-class constants. By
"compile-time", I meant constants that were declared like

```php
<?php

const MY_CONST = 'Testing';
```

rather than "runtime" constants declared like

```php
<?php

define( 'MY_CONST', 'Testing' );
```

However, the line between compile-time and run-time constants is not as
straightforward as that suggests.

## Compile time or not

Consider the following PHP file (`include_class.php`):
```php
<?php

return;

throw new Exception( 'Unreached' );

class Demo {}
```

If this file were to be [included][php-include] in a PHP program
- the file would be compiled
- the `return;` would be executed
- subsequent lines in the file would not be executed (the exception is thrown
in this demo just to demonstrate that the code after the `return;` is not
executed)

However, if you were to example whether or not the `Demo` class exists before
and after inclusion of the file, you would notice something slightly surprising:
even though the statements after the `return;` are not executed, the `Demo`
class gets defined when the file is included!

```php
<?php

var_dump( class_exists( Demo::class ) ); // False
require_once __DIR__ . '/include_class.php';
var_dump( class_exists( Demo::class ) ); // True
```

This is because class declarations are processed at *compile time*, rather than
*runtime*. When the file is included, *before* it gets executed, the class
declaration is processed. This allows referencing classes before (line-wise)
they have been defined, such as
```php
<?php

var_dump( class_exists( Later::class ) ); // True

class Later {}
```

However, in the case of "compile-time" constants, the constants do not actually
get defined until their definition is *executed*. Try including the following
PHP file (`include_constant.php`):

```php
<?php

return;

throw new Exception( 'Unreached' );

const MY_CONSTANT = 'Testing';
```

You'll find that because of the `return;`, the constant never gets defined:

```php
<?php

var_dump( defined( 'MY_CONSTANT' ) ); // False
require_once __DIR__ . '/include_constant.php';
var_dump( defined( 'MY_CONSTANT' ) ); // False
```

Thus, adding support for attributes on constants means that any attributes that
are applied to the constant would need to be processed *at runtime*, something
that wasn't previously done because all other supported attribute targets were
compile-time constructs (classes, functions, parameters, etc.).

## Optimization of `define()`

The line gets even blurrier when looking at PHP's built-in optimizer. As part
of "pass 1" with simple local optimizations ([pass1.c for PHP 8.4.5][pass1]),
for any function call where
- the function name is known to be `define()`
- the first parameter (name) is a literal string
- the second parameter (value) is a scalar

The optimizer will replace the op codes for a function call with the opcodes
that would be generated by using the `const` compile-time form. In other words,
* regardless of which form is used by the developer, the constant is not
actually defined at compile time, but only when the declaration gets executed
* the opcodes for the declaration of a runtime constant can be changed to match
those of a compile-time constant.

## Using

Now that constants support attributes, developers can apply userland attributes
to their constants to add various metadata. But, for me, the real power is in
the attributes that PHP itself provides, since those are able to hook into parts
of the engine.

As part of the RFC, the `#[Deprecated]` attribute was updated to also support
being added to userland constants. It is thus now possible for developers to
deprecate a non-class constant and have the engine emit deprecation warnngs
when the constant is used. From one of the tests for this new feature:

```php
<?php

#[\Deprecated(message: "use DEPRECATED_CONST_4", since: "1.0")]
const DeprecatedConst4 = 4;

echo DeprecatedConst4 . "\n";
```

a warning will be triggered:

> Deprecated: Constant DeprecatedConst4 is deprecated since 1.0, use
> DEPRECATED_CONST_4 in {file} on line {line}

My hope is that MediaWiki and other libraries will apply this attribute to send
warnings where previously only documentation could be used to indicate
deprecations.

[rfc]: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attributes-on-constants
[php-attribs]: https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.attributes.overview.php
[php-include]: https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.include.php
[pass1]: https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/23e05bdcf23319f4922513a91bb0d5e3925d5249/Zend/Optimizer/pass1.c
