---
title: Blog RSS Feed
extensions:
  pygments: true
---

# Blog RSS Feed

Last month, I received [a request][rss-req] to add an RSS feed to my blog. I am
happy to share that I have added such a feed, available at
[/Blog/feed/rss.xml][rss-link].

RSS (short for "Really Simple Syndication") is a web feed specification built on
top of XML. Rather than generating the XML entirely from scratch (potentially
using the PHP dom extension), I opted to use an open source library,
[laminas/laminas-feed][pgk-laminas], to create the XML content. While the
library certainly helped, I ran into a few challenges along the way.

## Laminas package

The first was the fact that the library unconditionally enables a "Slash"
extension which adds some extra elements to the output. Rather than manually
removing those elements from the resulting XML, I wanted to work within the
constraints of the library API. The result? A custom extension manager that
behaves differently based on the backtrace. The Laminas package still believes
that the extension exists, but the slash extension is skipped during
registration.

```php startinline=True
$old = Writer::getExtensionManager();
$manager = new class( $old ) extends ExtensionManager {
	public function has( $entryName ) {
		if ( $entryName === 'Slash\Renderer\Entry' ) {
			// Needs to return true when checking if the extension
			// exists, otherwise Laminas throws an exception
			$bt = debug_backtrace( DEBUG_BACKTRACE_IGNORE_ARGS, 2 );
			if (
				$bt[1]['class'] === Writer::class
				&& $bt[1]['function'] === 'hasExtension'
			) {
				return true;
			}
			return false;
		}
		return parent::has( $entryName );
	}
};
Writer::setExtensionManager( $manager );
```

While I'm not the most pleased with this approach, it does work, and it presents
a great example for my talk at PHPTek next week about what is and is not part of
the public API of PHP libraries.

Another issue that I encountered was the unconditional addition of `<guid>` tags
in the output - for these, I just removed them from the XML result with a
post-processing step.

Of course, I could have used another library, or forked the Laminas package,
but the Laminas package seemed like the easiest to use.

## Forward compatibility

I had initially planned for the RSS feed to live at `.../Blog/rss.xml`, but
realized that I might want to support other feed formats (e.g. Atom) in the
future. To keep all feeds organized together, I put the RSS feed at
`.../Blog/feed/rss.xml`, allowing other feeds to be added more easily. If you
visit the feed page without specifying a feed format ([/Blog/feed][feeds-link]),
a list of available feeds is shown; it is also shown when an unknown feed is
requested.

## Caching

Rather than regenerating the RSS feed on every request, I generate it ahead of
time and store the resulting XML in my website's git repository. At runtime, the
cached file is simply read from disk. Tests exist to ensure that the cached
version remains up-to-date.

Thinking about this further, the same approach could be taken to every other
known page on my website. Other than HTTP 404 and 405 pages that depend on
what path or method were used, the rest of my pages are static and could be
similarly cached. If performance ever becomes a concern, I may extend the same
approach to the rest of the site.

## Field testing

This blog post was published at the same time the RSS feed was created, so it
does not serve as a test of the feed working properly. After PHPTek next week,
I plan to write up another post about my experiences there, which will serve as
a great opportunity to confirm that the RSS feed behaves as expected.

[feeds-link]: /Blog/feed
[pgk-laminas]: https://packagist.org/packages/laminas/laminas-feed
[rss-link]: /Blog/feed/rss.xml
[rss-req]: https://github.com/DanielEScherzer/website-content/issues/79
